"The Tale of lost Time" read
A tale of lost time
There was once a boy named Petya Zubov. He studied in the third grade of the fourteenth school and was always lagging behind, both in Russian writing, and in arithmetic, and even in singing.
— I'll make it! — he was talking at the end of the first quarter. — I'll catch up with you all the second time.
In order to believe in something, you don't have to know if it's true.
The Moomin Cycle
close
And the second one came — he hoped for a third. So he was late and lagged behind, lagged behind and was late and did not grieve. I will "make it" yes, I will.
And one day Petya Zubov came to school, as always, late. I ran into the locker room. He slapped his briefcase against the fence and shouted:
— What kind of grandfather am I? — The boy asks.- I am Petya, a third grade student.
— Yes, look in the mirror! — says Aunt Natasha.
The boy looked in the mirror and almost fell. Petya Zubov saw that he had turned into a tall, thin, pale old man. His beard and mustache grew. Wrinkles covered the face with a mesh.
He shouted in a bass voice:
— Mom! — and ran out of the school.
A tale of lost time
He runs and thinks:
"Well, if Mom doesn't recognize me, then it's all gone.
Petya ran home and called three times.
Mom opened the door for him.
A tale of lost time
He looks at Petya and is silent. And Petya is silent too. He stands with his gray beard outstretched and almost cries.
— Who do you want, Grandpa? Mom finally asked.
"Don't you recognize me?" Petya whispered.
—I'm sorry, no," Mom replied.
Poor Petya turned away and walked away.
He goes and thinks:
— What a lonely, unhappy old man I am. No mom, no kids, no grandchildren, no friends… And most importantly, I didn't have time to learn anything. The real old people are either doctors, or masters, or academics, or teachers. And who needs me when I'm just a third grade student? They won't even give me a pension, because I've only been working for three years. And how he worked — for twos and threes. What will happen to me? I'm a poor old man! Am I an unhappy boy? How will it all end?
So Petya thought and walked, walked and thought, and he did not notice how he went out of the city and into the forest. And he walked through the forest until it got dark.
— It would be nice to have a rest, — thought Petya and suddenly saw that to the side, behind the Christmas trees, there was a white house.
A tale of lost time
Petya entered the house — there were no owners. There is a table in the middle of the room. A kerosene lamp hangs above it. There are four stools around the table. The clock is ticking on the wall. And there's hay piled up in the corner.
Petya lay down in the hay, burrowed deeper into it, warmed up, cried softly, wiped his tears with his beard and fell asleep.
A tale of lost time
Petya wakes up — the room is bright, the kerosene lamp is burning under the glass. And there are guys sitting around the table — two boys and two girls. Large, copper-bound abacuses lie in front of them. The guys are counting and muttering:
— Two years, and five more, and seven more, and three more… This is for you, Sergey Vladimirovich, and these are yours, Olga Kapitonovna, and this is for you, Marfa Vasilyevna, and these are yours, Panteley Zakharovich.
Who are these guys? Why are they so gloomy? Why do they groan and groan and sigh like real old people? Why do they call each other by their first name and patronymic? Why did they gather here at night, in a lonely forest hut?
Petya Zubov froze, not breathing, hanging on every word. And he was afraid of what he heard.
Not boys and girls, but evil wizards and evil witches were sitting at the table! That's how it turns out to work in the world: a person who wastes time in vain does not notice how he is getting old. And the evil wizards have found out about it and let's catch the guys wasting their time. And so the wizards caught Petya Zubov, and another boy, and two more girls and turned them into old men. Poor children have grown old, and they did not notice it themselves: after all, a person who wastes time in vain does not notice how he is getting old. And the time lost by the guys was taken by the wizards for themselves. And the wizards became little guys, and the guys became old men.
What should I do?
What to do?
Is it really not possible to return the lost youth to the guys?
The wizards counted the time, they wanted to hide the bills in the table, but Sergei Vladimirovich, the main one— did not allow it. He took the abacus and went over to the walkers. He turned the hands, pulled the weights, listened to the pendulum ticking, and clicked on the accounts again.
A tale of lost time
He counted, he counted, he whispered, he whispered, until the clock showed midnight. Then Sergey Vladimirovich mixed the knuckles and checked again how much he got.
Then he called the wizards to him and spoke softly:
— Gentlemen wizards! You should know that the guys we turned into old people today can still get younger.
— How? The wizards cried out.
— I'll tell you now, — Sergey Vladimirovich replied.
He tiptoed out of the cottage, walked around it, returned, bolted the door and stirred the hay with a stick.
Petya Zubov froze like a mouse.
But the kerosene lamp shone dimly, and the evil wizard did not see Petya. He called the other wizards closer to him and spoke softly:
— Unfortunately, this is how it works in the world: a person can escape from any misfortune. If the guys we turned into old men find each other tomorrow, come here to us at exactly twelve o'clock in the morning and turn the arrow of the walkers seventy-seven circles back, then the children will become children again, and we will die.
The wizards paused.
Then Olga Kapitonovna said:
"How would they know all this?"
And Panteley Zakharovich grumbled:
"They won't be here by twelve o'clock at night. At least for a minute, but they'll be late.
And Marfa Vasilyevna muttered:
— Where can they go! Where are they! These lazy people will not be able to count up to seventy-seven, they will immediately lose their way!
"That's just it,— Sergei Vladimirovich replied. "Still, keep your eyes open for now. If the guys get to the walkers, they touch the arrows — then we will not move from our place. Well, in the meantime, there's nothing to waste time — let's go to work.
And the wizards, hiding the bills in the table, ran like children, but at the same time they groaned, groaned and sighed like real old people.
A tale of lost time
Petya Zubov waited until the footsteps had died away in the forest. I got out of the house. And without wasting any time, hiding behind trees and bushes, he ran, rushed to the city to look for old school children.
The city hasn't woen up yet. It was dark in the windows, empty in the streets, only policemen were on duty. But then the dawn broke. The first trams rang. And finally Petya Zubov saw an old woman walking slowly down the street with a large basket.
Petya Zubov ran up to her and asked:
— Tell me, please, Grandma, are you not a schoolgirl?
And the old woman will knock her feet and swing her basket at Petya. Peter barely got away with it. He caught his breath a little and went on. And the city has already completely woken up. Trams are flying, people are rushing to work. Trucks are rumbling — sooner, sooner it is necessary to deliver goods to shops, factories, and the railway. The wipers clean off the snow, sprinkle the panel with sand so that pedestrians do not slip, do not fall, and do not waste time. How many times has Petya Zubov seen all this and only now understood why people are so afraid of not being in time, being late, falling behind.
A tale of lost time
Petya looks around, looking for old people, but does not find any suitable ones. Old people are running through the streets, but you can immediately see that they are real, not third graders.
Here's an old man with a briefcase. Probably a teacher. Here is an old man with a bucket and a brush — this is a painter. Here is a red fire truck rushing, and in the car is an old man — the fire chief of the city. This one, of course, has never wasted time in his life.
Petya walks, wanders, but there are no young old people, old children. Life is boiling all around. He alone, Petya, fell behind, was late, did not make it, was good for nothing, was not needed by anyone.
Exactly at noon, Petya went into a small park and sat down on a bench to rest.
And suddenly he jumped up.
He saw an old woman sitting on another bench nearby and crying.
Petya wanted to run up to her, but did not dare.
— I'll wait! — He said to himself. — I'll see what she does next.
A tale of lost time
And the old lady stopped crying, sits, and dangles her legs. Then she took a newspaper out of the pocket of one, and a piece of raisin cake out of the other. The old woman unfolded the newspaper — Petya gasped with joy: "Pioneer Truth"! and the old woman began to read and eat. He picks out the raisins, but does not touch the most delicious ones.
The old woman finished reading, hid the newspaper and sat down, and suddenly saw something in the snow. She bent down and grabbed the ball. Probably one of the children playing in the park lost this ball in the snow.
The old woman looked at the ball from all sides, wiped it carefully with a handkerchief, got up, walked slowly to the tree and let's play three-way.
Petya rushed to her through the snow, through the bushes. Running and screaming:
— Grandma! Honestly, you're a schoolgirl!
The old woman jumped up with joy, grabbed Petya by the hands and answered:
— That's right, that's right! I am a third grade student Marusya Pospelova. And who are you?
Petya told Marusa who he was. They joined hands and ran to look for the rest of their comrades. We searched for an hour, two, three. Finally we entered the second courtyard of a huge house.
A tale of lost time
And they see an old woman jumping behind the woodshed. She drew classes with chalk on the asphalt and jumps on one leg, chasing a pebble.
Petya and Marusya rushed to her.
— Grandma! Are you a schoolgirl?
— A schoolgirl! — the old lady answers. — Third grade student Nadenka Sokolova. And who are you?
Petya and Marusya told her who they were. All three of them took hands and ran to look for their last comrade.
But he seemed to have disappeared through the ground. Wherever the old people went — into courtyards, gardens, children's theaters, children's movies, and the House of Entertaining Science — the boy disappeared, and that's all.
And time is passing. It was already getting dark. The lights were already on in the lower floors of the houses. The day is ending. What to do? Is everything really gone?
Suddenly Marusya screamed:
— Look! Look at this!
Petya and Nadenka looked and saw this: a tram was flying, number nine. And an old man is hanging on a sausage. The hat is famously pulled over the ear, the beard is fluttering in the wind. An old man rides and whistles. His comrades are looking for him, they've lost their way, but he's riding all over the city and not blowing his mind!
